BRIEF DESCRIPTION  A branched, hairy, herbaceous legume reaching 20-100 cm in height with straight or bent stems and roots reaching 1-2 m deep. The leaves have 11-15 leaflets, the flowers are white, pink to purplish or blue and the pods are 14-29 mm long. USES  It is mainly consumed as a dry pulse. The whole dried seeds are eaten cooked, boiled or made into dhal. Seeds are ground to flour and used in confectionery. Young shoots or green pods, shelled for the peas and eaten as a snack or vegetable. Pod hairs have medicinal properties. The seed husks are used as feed for livestock and poultry. GROWING PERIOD  Annual. Pods may be harvested 90-120 days or 130-180 days from sowing. COMMON NAMES  Chick Pea, Bengal Gram, Gram, Indian Gram, Cafe Francaise, Garbanzo bean, Ceseron, Cicerole, Ciche, Gairrance, Gairoutte, Pois Becu, Pois Cafe, Pois Chabot, Pois de Brebis, Pois Pointu, Pois chiche, Gravancos, Sigro, Chicher, Cicererbis, Echte Kicher, Fontanellerbse, Kicherbse, Ziersererbsen, Ziserbohne, Adas, Buthalai, Chala, Chota But, Chunna, Harimandha-kam, Kadala, Karikadale, Korkadala, Sangalu, Sanikalu, Sundal Kadalai, Kachang Kuda, Kachang Arab, Kala-pe, Kulapia, Sin-gaung-kala-pe, Konda Kadala, Hanaz, Djelbane, Ikiker, Lablabi, Omnos, Alhamos, Beiqa, Blabi, Chemps, Hamica, Hammes, Himmos, jumes, Adungare, ater Cajeh, Atir Saho, Chimbera, Sembera, Shimbrah, Shumbra, Hummous, Kabkaza, Kebkabeik, Mdengu, Yellow Gram, Garbanza, Gravancos, Thua hua chang. FURTHER INF  Chickpea originated in south-eastern Anatolia, Turkey. Elevation of up to 1200 m are suitable for the cultivation of most forms of chickpea but in Ethiopian and East Africa cultivation can be found up to 2300 m. Photoperiod 9-16 hours. Optimum seed setting is normally achieved when the relative humidity varies from 20-40% and mild winter or sprong rains during the vegetative stage are advantegeous. Excessive humidity, heavy rain or hailstorms, especially during the flowering stage may have detrimental effect on seed-setting. Chickpea is adapted to moderate temperatures during the growing period, but tolerates considerable heat during the fruiting and ripening period. Photosynthesis pathway C 3. In Africa average yield of rain-fed chickpea ranges from 350-1170 kg/ha. Experimental yields of up to 4 t/ha have been reported.
