Rice (Oryza sativa L.) is a major food crop of the northeastern states. The majority of the rice-growing area in the hills (under uplands and in jhooms) is under traditional organic cultivation without the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Even in plains where fertilizer is used, the utilization level is much below the national average. Therefore, prospects for organic rice production are good.

Organic rice production involves recycling of crop residues, crop rotation, inclusion of legumes in the system both in sequence or as intercrop, green manuring, off-farm waste recycling, use of mineral rocks like rock phosphate, mechanical cultivation, and biological and organic pest control. Weed control, soil fertility, and management of pests and diseases are the principal challenges associated with organic rice production.

Climatic Requirements
In India, rice is grown under widely varying conditions of altitude and climate. The rice crop generally needs a hot and humid climate. The average temperature requirement throughout the life period of the crop ranges between 21 to 37°C. At the time of tillering, the crop requires slightly higher temperatures. The temperature requirement for blooming is in the range of 26.5 to 29.5°C, and for ripening, the temperature should be between 20 and 25°C.

Soil
Rice can be grown under any type of soil reaction varying from acidic to alkaline. Soil having good water retention capacity with a good amount of clay and organic matter is ideal. Well-drained, loamy, and light alluvial soils with a pH of 5.0 to 6.5 are most suitable for proper growth and productivity.

Varieties
Low Latitude Varieties: IR 64, Naveen, Gomati Dhan, Ranjit, RC-Maniphou-4, RC-Maniphou-5, RC-Maniphou-7, RC Maniphou 10, TRC Borodhan-1, DR 92, Shahsarang 1, Lampnah, etc.
Aromatic and Fine Grain Rice: Joha, Kalikhasa, Harinarayan

Mid Altitude Varieties:
Upland: Bhalum-1, Bhalum-2, Bhalum-3, Bhalum-4, Iuron, and IET 20204
Lowland: Shahsarang-1, IR-64, Lampnah, VD-82, Krishma Hamsa, Mendri, Manipuri
Aromatic and Fine Grain Rice: Megha AR-1, Megha AR-2, Kekeki Joha

High Altitude Varieties: Megha Rice 1, Megha Rice 2, Megha Rice 3

Crop Duration: 120 – 160 days depending upon varieties and sowing time

Seed Rate:
For transplanting, a seed rate of 35-40 kg/ha for medium to fine type rice varieties and 40-50 kg/ha for bold type varieties is sufficient for transplanting one hectare of land. For direct seeding in upland conditions, a seed rate of 60-80 kg/ha is required to get a good plant stand. For the System of Rice Intensification (SRI), 5 kg/ha is recommended, and for Integrated Crop Management (ICM), 10 kg/ha is recommended.

Seed Treatment:
Seed treatment is essential to ensure healthy seedlings.

Land Preparation:
For transplanting, the land should be prepared thoroughly and kept well-leveled with peripheral bunding. Puddling should be done 3-4 times to make it weed-free and water-retentive. Apply FYM 15 t/ha or FYM 7.5 t/ha + V.C 2.5 t/ha with 150 kg/ha Rock phosphate 20 days before the last ploughing. The quantity can vary if other combinations of organic manure (i.e., chicken manure, deoiled meals, etc.) are used.

For direct seeding, two cross ploughings (4 ploughings) are necessary to get good tilth of soil and weed-free land. Application of lime @ 2 t/ha at the first or second ploughing is necessary to obtain good yield. Lime should be applied at least 1-2 weeks before sowing. Liming should be repeated every 3-4 years. The quantity of organic manures and rock phosphate shall be the same as above.

Nursery Preparation:
Wet Method: The wet method can be adopted in areas where water is available. Prepare raised beds of 5-10 cm height, 1-1.5 m width, and of convenient length with drainage channels between the beds. The total seedbed area should be 1000 m² for planting in 1 ha. Apply vermicompost @ 500g/m² and rice husk ash @ 100 g/m² of the nursery bed and mix well with the soil at the time of preparation of the field. Application of vermicompost reduces the incidence of thrips. If vermicompost is not available, apply compost or cattle manure @ 1 kg/m² and 100 g of rice husk ash/m² of the nursery bed and mix well with the soil at the time of preparation of the field. Biofertilizers can also be mixed with FYM/compost before application to nursery @ 2kg/1000 m².

Dry Method: This method is practiced in areas where sufficient water is not available, and the time of planting is uncertain. Prepare raised beds of 1-1.5 m width, 15 cm height, and of convenient length. Apply vermicompost @ 500 g/m² and rice husk ash @ 100 g/m² of the nursery bed. If vermicompost is not available, apply compost or cattle manure @ 1 kg/m² and 100 g of rice husk ash/m² of the nursery bed and mix well with the soil at the time of preparation of the field. Sow the seeds treated as described under the dry seed treatment method, evenly over the bed, and cover with fine sand/soil.

Time of Transplanting/Sowing:
Transplanting: The optimum time of transplanting is the first fortnight of July for low and mid-altitude regions. The time of transplanting should be adjusted to avoid low temperatures during flowering, especially in higher altitudes (above 1300 m). Therefore, under high altitude, transplanting should be completed within 15th June, preferably by the first week of June. For mid and low-altitude valley land, transplanting can be done as late as the 3rd week of July with closer spacing (15 x 10 cm) and aged seedlings (40-45 days old). Seedling age of 20-25 days with 20 x 15 cm spacing and 2-3 seedlings/hill is considered best for timely transplanted crops. For SRI, 10-12 days old seedlings are transplanted, and for ICM, 15-20 days old seedlings are transplanted. For SRI and ICM methods of rice cultivation, only 1 and 2 seedlings are transplanted/hill, respectively, with a spacing of 25 x 25 cm for SRI and 20 x 20 cm for ICM.

Direct Sown: In upland direct-sown crops, sowing should be completed within the first fortnight of June in mid-altitude conditions. Timely sowing is necessary to have enough time for the succeeding rabi crops, which are normally sown in the second fortnight of October. Direct-seeded crops are sown in lines 25-30 cm apart, maintaining a seed rate of 60-80 kg/ha.

Age of Seedlings and Spacing Methods:
Conventional Rice Culture (CRC): Spacing of 20 x 15 cm, 30 days old seedlings, 3 seedlings/hill.
Integrated Crop Management (ICM): Spacing of 20 x 20 cm, 20 days old seedlings, 2 seedlings/hill.
System of Rice Intensification (SRI): Spacing of 25 x 25 cm, 12 days old seedlings, 1 seedling/hill.
Late Transplanting: Spacing of 20 x 10 cm, 30-35 days old seedlings, 3-4 seedlings/hill.

Lime Application:
Lime application ameliorates soil acidity and enhances crop nutrient uptake. In general, the addition of lime is absolutely necessary when the pH is lower than 5.0, and it is not advisable, especially for rice, when the pH varies between 5.5 and 6.5. For direct-seeded crops, apply lime @ 2000 kg/ha about one month before sowing, and if lime was applied in the furrow, the dose should be 500 kg/ha applied at the time of sowing. For transplanted crops, apply lime @ 2000 kg/ha about one month before transplanting once every three years.

Nutrient Management for Main Field:
Rice crops usually require 100 kg N, 40 kg P, and 40-60 kg K. As organic management is an integrated approach, efforts should be made to recycle the biomass to keep the soil rich in organic carbon. Therefore, the use of green biomass, green manuring, and biofertilizers should be the first priority. Any gap in nutrient requirements should be compensated with the use of organic manures. One cycle of green manuring with a legume crop such as Sesbania, one cycle of dual Azolla culture, and the use of Azospirillum and PSB biofertilizer can meet 75-80% of nutrient requirements. In such cases, only 25-30% of nutrients need to be compensated through manures (3-4 tons of FYM or 2 tons of vermicompost/ha).

Nutrient Management if Entire Nutrient is Supplemented by Manures and Organic/Mineral Fertilizers:
Direct Sown: In upland direct-seeded crops, 12-15 tonnes of well-rotted Farm Yard Manure (FYM) along with 150 kg of rock phosphate is sufficient for sowing one hectare of land. Alternatively, 5-7.5 tonnes of vermicompost along with 150 kg of rock phosphate may be used. Integrated application of FYM @ 10 t/ha and vermicompost 2.5 t/ha along with 150 kg of rock phosphate is the best option for higher productivity and sustainability of rice production. Application of neem cake @ 150 kg/ha provides protection against soil-borne diseases and improves the nutrition of rice crops.

Transplanted: All the weed biomass and crop residues of the previous crop should be incorporated within the field, which improves the fertility of the soil and reduces the requirement for organic manure application. Apply 10-12 tonnes of FYM before 20 days of transplanting and 250-300 kg of neem cakes during transplanting of the rice crop. Alternatively, apply 5-6 tonnes of vermicompost before 20 days of transplanting and 250-300 kg of neem cakes during transplanting of the rice crop. Application of 5 tonnes of FYM + 2 tonnes of vermicompost + 3 tonnes of green manures/weed biomass (Eupatorium/Ambrosia) before 20 days of transplanting and 250-300 kg of neem cakes during transplanting of the rice crop is the best nutrient management option. Rock phosphate @ 150 kg/ha may be applied for better phosphorus nutrition.

Note: Quantities of manures can be adjusted according to the nutrient contents therein and the organic carbon status of the soils. During the initial conversion years, the above-mentioned quantities are essential to get optimum productivity. Once the soil is adapted to organic management and has adequate organic carbon, then the quantities of organic manures can be reduced. One cycle of green manure can add up to 75 kg of N. Similarly, Azolla dual culture can also add an additional 20-25 kg of N. In such cases, reduced quantities of manures will be needed. Rock phosphate and neem cake can still be used. Combined use of Azospirillum and phosphate-solubilizing bacterial biofertilizers also helps in adding 20-25 kg of N and 10-12 kg of phosphorus.

Top Dressing and Foliar Feeding:
In organic farming, as all manures and organic fertilizers, including green manures, are applied as basal doses, the crop may feel hungry at the grain formation and filling stage. Therefore, it is advisable to undertake topdressing and/or foliar feeding through any of the following methods:

Cow urine mixed with water as soil application @ 50 liters/ha twice at 60 and 75 days after sowing.

Biogas slurry diluted with water @ 200 liters/ha.

Vermiwash (5%) or Panchgavya (3%) or fishmeal extract or on-farm made protein hydrolysate (4-5 ml/liter of water) as foliar spray. Two sprays can be given at 60 and 70 days after sowing.

Methods of Green Manuring:
Leguminous green manures used in rice-based cropping systems include Sesbania aculeata, Sesbania rostrata, Sesbania speciosa, and Crotalaria juncea. These are grown during the pre-rice season between April and June, and the biomass is incorporated into the soil before rice is transplanted. Wherever limited irrigation facilities are available, grain legumes such as green gram, black gram, and cowpea can be grown in the summer season.

In-Situ Green Manuring:
Farmers can choose the green manure crop according to their local availability and agroclimatic conditions. Dhaincha (Sesbania aculeata) is the commonly used and ideal green manure crop for rice fields. Usually, after the harvest of the rabi crop, dhaincha is sown with the onset of summer showers and is ploughed and incorporated 8-10 weeks after sowing. Among the green manure crops, Sesbania aculeata is the one that can supply the highest amount of biomass and nitrogen. It is fairly drought-tolerant and resistant to waterlogging. It is suitable for loamy and clayey soils. One crop of dhaincha can add 10-20 tonnes of biomass per hectare. For sowing one hectare area, 20-25 kg of seed is required. It can fix about 75-80 kg of N per hectare depending on the environmental conditions.

Methods of Application of Biofertilizers:
Azospirillum:
Seed Treatment: Mix the carrier-based inoculum 200 g in 200 ml of rice gruel to make a slurry, which is sufficient to treat 10 kg of seed. The seeds are mixed in the slurry so as to have a uniform coating of the inoculum over the seeds and then shade-dried for 30 minutes. The shade-dried seeds should be sown within 24 hours. Biorganic RF 79 (biofertilizer) developed at ICAR Complex, Umiam @ 40 ml/L for seed treatment has been found to increase rice productivity by about 15%.

Main Field Application: Two kilograms of Azospirillum is mixed with 50 kg of dried powdered farmyard manure and then broadcast in one hectare of the main field just before transplanting.

Phosphorus Solubilizing Bacteria (PSB):
Carrier-based phosphobacteria can be applied as seed treatment and field application as in the case of Azospirillum.

Azolla Green Manure:
Azolla can be applied as green manure for rice before transplanting. For this, Azolla is grown 15-20 days before transplanting of rice by applying 1-2 tonnes of fresh inoculum per hectare in a well-prepared field. Rock phosphate is applied @ 62.5 kg/ha in three equal splits at an interval of seven days. After the formation of a thick mat, water is drained out, and the field is ploughed for incorporating Azolla.

Azolla Dual Culture:
Growing Azolla along with rice is more easy and feasible. Azolla technology is very efficient in terms of nitrogen fixation and biomass accumulation during the rabi season due to better environmental conditions for its vegetative multiplication. It can also be used for the late kharif season. Fresh biomass of Azolla is applied in the main field 7-10 days after transplanting rice. Inoculation of fresh biomass of Azolla @ 200 kg/ha could multiply faster and cover the rice field as a green mat in 2-3 weeks with 15-20 tonnes of biomass accumulation. Azolla is incorporated at the time of the first weeding. It can be done with a weeder or left for self-decomposition. Azolla decomposes in the flooded rice field in 2-3 weeks. During the incorporation of Azolla, the leftover fronds float on the water surface, which multiply and cover the rice field. Again, 2-3 incorporations are possible. The cultivation of Azolla not only supplies biomass and N but also contributes K, P, Ca, S, Zn, and Fe. The suppression of weed growth is another added advantage of Azolla cultivation along with rice.

The nutrient content of some tree leaves such as Gliricidia maculata, grown abundantly in humid tropical areas of the NE region, contains 2.9% N, 0.5% P, and 2.8% K on a dry weight basis. Leaves and tender branches of such plants can be a local source of leaf manure, producing 12-15 kg of dry matter per tree. About 400 plants can be grown on the peripheral boundary and can yield 5-6 tonnes of green manure per hectare. Other tree species like Crotalaria juncea and Tephrosia purpurea are observed to have 2.4-2.7% N, 0.3-0.6% P, and 0.8-2.0% K.

Water Management:
Transplanted Rice: Continuous submergence of 2-5 cm during crop growth (transplanting to maturity) gave higher yield. This practice helps to suppress weed growth right from the beginning. Water is drained out during fertilizer application. The depth of water should not exceed 5 cm in the field, particularly at the tillering stage of the crop. A higher depth of water during tillering reduces the number of tillers/hill, causing a reduction in yield. After the completion of tillering, the field should be drained out for a week and reflooded again. This will result in a higher number of effective tillers/hill. In any case, there should not be any water stress during the panicle initiation to grain filling stage. Irrigation should be stopped 3-4 weeks before harvesting the crop. Under SRI practice, no flooding is needed, and the field is kept saturated. No standing water is to be maintained during tillering up to panicle initiation. Intermittent wetting and drying until the panicle initiation stage is desirable. The period of drying and wetting can range from 2-7 days.

Direct Seeded Rice: Cultivation of crops in topo-sequence helps in better utilization of water in hill slopes and terraces. While rice is cultivated in terraces or slopes, it should be grown in the lower portion of the hill slope where runoff concentrates. Water harvesting in-situ in flat or terrace land can be done by providing peripheral bunding to increase crop yield. Saturation and submergence are equally effective for direct-sown rice.

Weed Management:
Weed control practices include hand weeding, crop rotation, land leveling, stale seedbed preparation, flooding, and the use of rotary weeders, among others. Longer crop rotation breaks the cycle of weed growth, while proper land preparation, leveling, and flooding to a uniform depth suppress weeds directly. In upland rice, intercropping with legumes like soybean and groundnut (4:2 row ratio) has been found to reduce weed problems besides adding to soil fertility.

Application of fresh makrishal (Schima wallichii) leaves and twigs @ 10 t/ha has been found to improve rice yield while keeping weeds at a minimal level. Regular incorporation of weeds into the soil during the fallow period not only reduces the weed problem but also adds to the soil nutrient reserve. Longer rotations allow additional time to break weed life cycles and reduce the number of weed seeds in the soil. Other weed-control options focus on the use of field flooding to suppress weeds directly and give the crop a competitive advantage. Flooding will be more effective if fields are precision-leveled. Leveling makes the water depth uniform and facilitates rapid flow onto and from the field. Dual cropping of rice with Azolla also reduces weed problems and improves productivity through the addition of macro and micronutrients. Releasing about 20 ducklings per hectare also keeps weeds at a minimal level and increases rice yield.

Pest and Disease Management:
The incidence of pests and diseases in properly managed organic fields is generally low. This is due to the use of resistant varieties, cultural practices like crop rotations, timely planting, balanced nutrition, proper water management, clean field bunds, and the removal of infested leaves and plants. Selection of healthy and clean seed materials may also keep the problem of diseases and pests at a minimal level.

The pests and diseases in rice can be kept below the economic threshold limit (ETL) by using the following strategies:

A. Cultural and Mechanical Strategies:

Use of disease-free and disease-resistant/tolerant varieties.

Inoculating seeds with Azotobacter, Azospirillum, and treating with Trichoderma viride for protection against seed and soil-borne diseases in upland direct-seeded crops.

Adopting green manuring and adequate use of organic manures.

Growing legumes frequently and incorporating them into the soil at a tender stage.

Decomposing organic manures suppress the nematode population.

Soil application of neem cake @ 150 kg/ha or spraying of neem oil @ 2.5 ml/liter of water prevents insect pest and disease attacks and enhances plant growth and yield through the reduction in nitrogen loss from the system.

Timely planting, variety selection, and cultural practices to suppress weeds and encourage dense stands of rice help control stinkbugs and water weevils.

B. Ecological Strategies:

Install 4-5 pheromone traps per acre, separated by 75 feet distance. Fix the traps on supporting poles at a height of 1 foot above the crop canopy.

Install light traps, 2-3 traps per hectare, for mass trapping of insects. Light traps with an exit option for natural enemies of smaller size should be installed and operated around dusk time (6 pm to 10 pm).

Release natural enemies such as Trichogramma japonicum on 30 and 37 DAT against stem borers and Trichogramma chilonis on 37, 44, and 51 DAT (thrice) against leaf folders.

Release Platygaster oryzae parasitized galls @ 1 per 10 m² in the main field on 10 DAT against gall midge.

Grow flowering plants on borders, internal bunds, and as intercrops or strip crops in upland situations to attract natural enemies and repel insect pests harmful to the crop. After flowering, these plants can be used as green manure/mulch.

Keep monitoring the pest-defender ratio, and it should not exceed beyond 2:1. If it exceeds, adopt curative control measures. Individual pest-wise integrated management methods are given below:

1. Whorl Maggot (Hydrellia philippina Ferino):
Symptoms: Visible in early growth stages, mainly under lowland situations. White or transparent patches on leaves, pinholes, damaged leaves easily break from the wind, somewhat distorted leaves, clear or yellow spots on inner margins of emerging leaves, and stunting of plants with few tillers.

Management: There is no cultural control for rice whorl maggot. Small beneficial insects such as wasps can parasitize its eggs, Dolicopodid flies prey on the eggs, and ephydrid flies and spiders feed on the adults. Therefore, manage diversity and conditions for the proliferation of such beneficial insects. The rice plant can compensate for the damage caused by the rice whorl maggot with growth. Usually, the symptoms disappear during the maximum tillering stage of the crop.

2. Rice Hispa [Dicladispa armigera (Olivier)]:
Symptoms: Larvae scrape the upper surface of the leaf blade, leaving only the lower epidermis and white streaks parallel to the midrib. Irregular translucent white patches that are parallel to the leaf veins are caused by the tunneling of larvae through leaf tissue, causing withering of damaged leaves. Leaves become whitish and membranous. Rice fields appear burnt when severely infested.

Management: Avoid over-manuring. Close plant spacing results in greater leaf densities that can harbor higher hispa numbers. To prevent egg-laying of the pests, shoot tips can be cut. Clipping and burying shoots in the mud can reduce grub populations by 75-92%. Spray Beauveria bassiana (1%) having 10^6 viable spores/gm/ml. Eupatorium leaf extract (5%) has also been found to be effective as a foliar spray.

3. Yellow Stem Borer (Scirpophaga incertulas):
Symptoms: Larvae feed upon tillers and cause dead hearts or drying of the central tiller during the vegetative stage and cause whiteheads at the reproductive stage. Tiny holes on the stems and tillers and frass or fecal matter inside the damaged stems can be seen.

Management: Grow resistant varieties. Clip the tip of seedlings before transplanting to eliminate egg masses. Avoid close planting and continuous water stagnation at early stages. Collect and destroy the egg masses. Pull out and destroy the affected tillers. Set up light traps to attract and kill the moths. Harvest the crop up to the ground level and disturb the stubbles with a plough immediately after harvest. Release the egg parasitoid, Trichogramma japonicum, on 30 and 37 DAT twice @ 5 ml/ha/release. Apply Bacillus thuringiensis var. kurstaki and neem seed kernel extract in combination of 2.5 kg and 1% to reduce oviposition by the stem borer.

4. Rice Bug (Leptocorisa oratorius, L. varicornis, and L. acuta):
Symptoms: Rice bugs damage rice by sucking out the contents of developing grains from pre-flowering spikelets to the soft dough stage (milky stage). Individual grains become chaffy. Black spots on the grains at the site of feeding puncture. Buggy odor in rice fields during the milky stage.

Management: Keep the field free from weeds and grasses. Drain excess water from the field. Set up light traps during the full moon period to attract a large number of bugs and kill them. Conserve pest predators such as spiders, coccinellids, and wasps to check the pest. Ducks can be allowed in the field to pick up the bugs. Planting fields, within a village, at the same time (synchronous planting) helps reduce rice bug problems. Foliar spray of neem seed kernel extract 5%, Notchi leaf powder extract 5%, Ipomoea leaf powder extract 5%, or Prosopis leaf powder extract 5% helps keep the problem under control. Panchgavya 3% has also been found effective.

5. Brown Plant Hopper (Nilaparvata lugens):
Symptoms: Crescent-shaped white eggs inserted into the midrib or leaf sheath, white to brown nymphs, and brown or white adults feed near the base of tillers. Leaves turn yellow and later brownish "hopper burn." Presence of honeydew and sooty molds at the basal parts is a characteristic symptom. Infestation is more severe during the panicle initiation stage.

Management: Use resistant varieties. Avoid close planting and provide 30 cm rogue spacing at every 2.5 m to reduce pest incidence. Control irrigation by intermittent draining. Set up light traps to monitor pest population and control. Release natural enemies like Lycosa pseudoannulata and Cyrtorhinus lividipennis. Spray neem seed kernel extract 5% (25 kg/ha) or neem oil 2% (10 liters/ha) after draining the water and direct the spray jet towards the base of plants. Foliar spray of Verticillium lecanii @ 5 gm/liter of water is also effective.

6. Gall Midge (Orseolia oryzae):
Symptoms: Formation of a hollow cavity or tubular gall at the base of the infested tiller. The gall formed is a silvery white hollow tube, 1 cm wide and 10-30 cm long. Affected tillers inhibit the growth of leaves and fail to produce panicles. Deformed, wilted, and rolled leaves, elongation of leaf sheaths, also called onion leaf or silver shoot. Plants get stunted.

Management: Early planting helps the crop escape infestation. Use resistant varieties. Harvest the crop and plough immediately. Remove the alternate host and adjust the time of planting. Use quick-growing varieties. Set up light traps @ 1/ha as a monitoring device. Infrared light traps attract gall midge effectively. Release the larval parasitoid, Platygaster oryzae, through parasitized galls @ 1 per 10 m² in the main field at 10 DAS. The carabid beetle, Ophionia indica, is an effective predator. Conserve spider predators like Tetragnatha and Argiope catenulata in the rice ecosystem to feed on the adult midge.

7. Leaf Folders [Cnaphalocrosis medinalis (Guenée) and Marasmia spp.]:
Symptoms: Longitudinal and transparent whitish streaks on damaged leaves. Tubular folded leaves, leaf tips sometimes fastened to the basal part of the leaf. Heavily infested fields appear scorched with many folded leaves.

Management: Use resistant varieties. Clipping of affected leaves reduces the pest population. Keep the bunds clean by trimming them and remove grassy weeds. Follow rice with a different crop or fallow period. Flood and plough the field after harvesting if possible. Remove grassy weeds from fields and borders. Reduce the density of planting. Set up light traps to attract and kill the moth. Release Trichogramma chilonis on 37, 44, and 51 DAT thrice. Spray neem seed kernel extract 5% three times.

8. Caseworm (Nymphula depunctalis):
Symptoms: Leaf cases floating on water. Leaves cut at right angles as with a pair of scissors. Leaves with papery upper epidermis as they were fed on by insects. Skeletonized leaf tissues usually appear ladder-like.

Management: Release larval parasitoids such as Elasmus sp., Apanteles sp., Bracon sp., and Hormiues sp. Release pupal parasitoids such as Pediobius sp., Apsilops sp., and Eupteromalus parnarae. Drain water from the field. Dislodge the cases by running a rope over the young crop.

9. Sheath Blight (Rhizoctonia solani):
Symptoms: Symptoms of sheath blight appear from the tillering stage until the milk stage. Oval or ellipsoidal greenish-gray lesions, usually 1-3 cm long, on the leaf sheath, initially just above the soil or water level. Under favorable conditions, these initial lesions multiply and expand to the upper part of the sheaths, the leaves, and then spread to neighboring tillers belonging to different hills (in transplanted rice) or plants (direct-seeded rice). Leaves usually have irregular lesions, often with gray-white centers and brown margins as they grow older.

Management: Maintain plant density (direct seeding or transplanting). Control weeds, especially on the levees. Drain rice fields relatively early in the cropping season to reduce sheath blight epidemics. Improve canopy architecture by reducing the seeding rate or providing wider plant spacing.

10. Bacterial Blight (Xanthomonas oryzae pv. oryzae):
Symptoms: Water-soaked lesions move from the tip downwards on the edges of leaves. Gradually turn into yellow and straw-colored stripes with wavy margins. In the early morning in humid areas, yellowish, opaque, turbid drops of bacterial ooze may be seen. In the Kresek (wilt) phase, leaves roll completely, droop, and plants die completely.

Management: Balanced fertilization. Ensure good drainage of fields and nurseries. Keep fields clean. Remove weed hosts. Allow fallow fields to dry to suppress disease agents in the soil and plant residues. Seed and soil application of Trichoderma viride and Bacillus subtilis has also been found to manage the disease. Use 10 gm each for 1 kg seed treatment and 2.5 kg each/ha mixed with 300-500 kg FYM/compost for soil treatment.

11. Rice Blast (Pyricularia grisea (P. oryzae)):
Symptoms: The disease can infect paddy at all stages and all aerial parts of the plant. Leaf and neck infections are more severe. Small specks originate on leaves, subsequently enlarging into spindle-shaped spots with ashy centers. Later, several spots coalesce to form big irregular patches.

Management: Remove collateral weed hosts from bunds and channels. Use only disease-free seedlings. Use resistant varieties. Seed treatment, seedling root dip treatment, and foliar spray of Pseudomonas fluorescens liquid biopesticide @ 5 ml/liter of water.

12. Sheath Rot (Sarocladium oryzae):
Symptoms: Discoloration in the flag leaf sheath. Rotting occurs on the leaf sheath that encloses the young panicles. Irregular spots or lesions, with dark reddish-brown margins and gray centers. Discoloration in the sheath. Lesions enlarge and often coalesce and may cover the entire leaf sheath. Whitish powdery growth inside the affected sheaths and young panicles. Infected panicles and grains are sterile, shriveled, partially or unfilled, and discolored. The disease is important as the crop appears during the maturity stage.

Management: Seed treatment with Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 10 gm/kg seed. Soil application of Pseudomonas fluorescens @ 2.5 kg per hectare mixed with FYM/compost. Foliar spray of Pseudomonas fluorescens liquid @ 5 ml/liter of water from 45 days after sowing/planting for 3 times at an interval of 10 days.

13. Root Knot (Meloidogyne graminicola):
Symptoms: Characteristic hooked-like galls on roots. Newly emerged leaves appear distorted and crinkled along the margins. Stunting and chlorosis.

Management: Heavily infected plants flower and mature early. Keep the crop always in submerged conditions. Cultural control includes continuous flooding, raising rice seedlings in flooded soils, and crop rotation. These practices will help prevent root invasion by nematodes. Soil solarization with 50-100µ clear polythene sheets for 3 weeks before preparation of fields. Soil treatment with Trichoderma harzianum and Paecilomyces lilacinus @ 2.5 kg each/ha mixed with 300-500 kg FYM/compost.

Cropping Systems:
Since successful rabi cropping is very difficult under rainfed upland in the NEH region, cropping intensity and total productivity can be increased by intercropping soybean, arhar, and groundnut with rice in upland. It has been found that rice + soybean (4:2 row ratio) and rice + groundnut (4:2 row ratio) are promising in NEH regions. Wherever possible, rice should be rotated with leguminous crops for improving soil health and sustaining rice productivity.

Under high-altitude conditions, monoculture of rice is prevalent, but a cropping sequence of potato-rice is recommended. Under mid and low altitudes, rice-mustard, rice-pea/lentil is recommended. In irrigated conditions of Manipur and Tripura, rice-rice-pea/lentil/toria as rainfed is in practice. Rice + tomato, rice - tomato, rice + chillies, rice-chillies, rice-mustard, rice-French bean, rice-carrot, etc., are recommended on raised and sunken bed systems under wet and marshy valley land of Meghalaya or elsewhere in the NEH Region.

Under raised and sunken bed systems of cultivation in lowlands and valley lands, rice-rice or rice-pulses on sunken beds and rice-vegetables on raised beds have very good potential for higher productivity and income.

Harvesting:
Rice attains maturity at around 30 days for early and 40 days for medium to late-maturing varieties after 50% heading in low and mid-altitude areas. In high-altitude areas, it may take some more time to attain maturity. Harvesting is done at the yellow ripening stage to avoid shattering loss in the field. SRI rice matures 12-15 days earlier than conventional rice and 7-10 days earlier than ICM.

Yield:
A well-managed direct-seeded crop yields about 2.5-3.0 t/ha, and a transplanted crop gives about 4.5-5.0 t/ha under organic production.